## \#Definition Linear Transformations

Let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces. A **linear transformation** from $V$ to $W$ is a function $T: V \rightarrow W$ such that, for all $\vec{v}*{1},\vec{v}*{2}\in V$ and $c\in\mathbb{R}$,

1. $T(\vec{v}*{1}+\vec{v}*{2})=T(\vec{v}*{1})+T(\vec{v}*{2})$
1. $T(c\vec{v})=cT(\vec{v})$

## \#Remark Alternative Definition of Linear Transformations

The [two conditions for Linear Transformations](6.4%20Linear%20Transformations.md#definition-linear-transformations) can be rewritten such that, $T:V\rightarrow W$ is a **linear transformation** if and only if,
$$T(c\_{1}\vec{v}*{1}+c*{2}\vec{v}*{2}+\dots+c*{k}\vec{v}*{k}) = c*{1}T(\vec{v}*{1})+c*{2}T(\vec{v}*{2})+\dots+c*{k}T(\vec{v}*{k})$$
for all $\vec{v}*{1},\vec{v}*{2},\dots,\vec{v}*{k}\in V$ and $c\_{1},c\_{2},\dots,c\_{k}\in\mathbb{R}$.

## \#Example Proving the Transpose of a Matrix is a Linear Transformation

Define the linear transformation $S$ as:
$$S:M\_{m,n}\rightarrow M\_{n,m}$$
by:
$$S(A)=A^{T}$$
In order to prove $S$ is a [linear transformation](6.4%20Linear%20Transformations.md#definition-linear-transformations) then, for all $A,B\in M\_{m,n}$ and $c\in\mathbb{R}$, the following conditions must hold true:

1. $S(A+B)=S(A)+S(B)$
1. $S(cA)=cS(A)$

### 1. Prove $S(A+B)=S(A)+S(B)$.

Given $S(A)=A^{T}$, then:
$$S(A+B)=(A+B)^{T}$$
Following [Property 2 of the Transpose](../Chapter%203%20Matrices/3.2%20Matrix%20Algebra.md#theorem-properties-of-the-transpose):
$$S(A+B)=(A+B)^{T}=A^{T}+B^{T}$$
Once again, given $S(A)=A^{T}$, then:
$$S(A+B)=(A+B)^{T}=A^{T}+B^{T}=S(A)+S(B)$$
Thus, this part is proven.

### 2. Prove $S(cA)=cS(A)$.

Given $S(A)=A^{T}$, then:
$$S(cA)=(cA)^{T}$$
Following [Property 3 of the Transpose](../Chapter%203%20Matrices/3.2%20Matrix%20Algebra.md#theorem-properties-of-the-transpose):
$$S(cA)=(cA)^{T}=cA^{T}$$
Once again, given $S(A)=A^{T}$, then:
$$S(cA)=(cA)^{T}=cA^{T}=cS(A)$$
Thus this condition is proven.
Given both conditions hold true, then $S$ is a linear transformation.

## \#Example Differentiating a Function is a Linear Transformation

Define the linear transformation $D$ as:
$$D:\mathcal{D}^{'}\rightarrow\mathcal{F}$$
by:
$$D(f)=f^{'}$$
In order to prove $D$ is a [linear transformation](6.4%20Linear%20Transformations.md#definition-linear-transformations) then, for all $f,g\in\mathcal{D}^{'}$ and $c\in\mathbb{R}$, the following conditions must hold true:

1. $D(f+g)=D(f)+D(g)$
1. $D(cf)=cD(f)$

### 1. Prove $D(f+g)=D(f)+D(g)$.

Given $D(f)=f^{'}$:
$$D(f+g)=(f+g)'$$
Following the [Sum and Difference Rule of Derivatives](https://www.math.ucdavis.edu/~kouba/Math17BHWDIRECTORY/Derivatives.pdf):
$$D(f+g)=(f+g)'=f'+g'$$
Once again, given $D(f)=f'$, then:
$$D(f+g)=(f+g)'=f'+g'=D(f)+D(g)$$
Thus the first condition is proven.

### 2. Prove $D(cf)=cD(f)$.

Given $D(f)=f'$:
$$D(cf)=(cf)'$$Following the [Constant Multiple Rule of Derivatives](https://www.math.ucdavis.edu/~kouba/Math17BHWDIRECTORY/Derivatives.pdf):
$$D(cf)=(cf)'=cf'$$
Once again, given $D(f)=f'$, then:
$$D(cf)=(cf)'=cf'=cD(f)$$
Thus the second condition holds true.
Given both conditions hold true, then $D$ is a linear transformation.

## \#Example Proving Integrating Functions is a Linear Transformation

Let $\mathcal{I}$ be the vector space of integrable functions $f$ from the interval $\[0,1\]$ to $\mathbb{R}$.
Define the linear transformation $I$ as:
$$I:\mathcal{I}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$$
by:
$$I(f)=\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx$$
In order to prove $D$ is a [linear transformation](6.4%20Linear%20Transformations.md#definition-linear-transformations) then, for all $f,g\in\mathcal{I}$ and $c\in\mathbb{R}$, the following conditions must hold true:

1. $I(f+g)=I(f)+I(g)$
1. $I(cf)=cI(f)$

### 1. Prove $I(f+g)=I(f)+I(g)$.

Given $I(f)=\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx$:
$$I(f+g)=\int\_{0}^{1}(f(x)+g(x))dx$$
Following the [Linearity Rules of Integration](https://www.mathcentre.ac.uk/resources/Engineering%20maths%20first%20aid%20kit/latexsource%20and%20diagrams/8_8.pdf):
$$I(f+g)=\int\_{0}^{1}(f(x)+g(x))dx=\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx+\int\_{0}^{1}g(x)dx$$
Once again, given $I(f)=\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx$, then:
$$I(f+g) = \int\_{0}^{1}(f(x)+g(x))dx = \int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx+\int\_{0}^{1}g(x)dx = I(f)+I(g)$$
Thus the first condition is proven.

### 2. Prove $I(cf)=cI(f)$.

Given $I(f)=\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx$:
$$I(cf)=\int\_{0}^{1}(cf)(x)dx$$
Following the [Linearity Rules of Integration](https://www.mathcentre.ac.uk/resources/Engineering%20maths%20first%20aid%20kit/latexsource%20and%20diagrams/8_8.pdf):
$$I(cf)=\int\_{0}^{1}(cf)(x)dx=\int\_{0}^{1}cf(x)dx=c\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx$$
Once again, given $I(f)=\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx$, then:
$$I(cf)=\int\_{0}^{1}(cf)(x)dx=\int\_{0}^{1}cf(x)dx=c\int\_{0}^{1}f(x)dx=cI(x)$$
Thus the second condition is proven.
Given both conditions hold true, then $I$ is a linear transformation.

## \#Remark The Zero Vector and Linear Transformations

If $T:V \rightarrow W$ is any linear transformation, then:
$$T(\vec{0})=T(0\cdot\vec{0})=0T(\vec{0})=\vec{0}$$
